[MUSIC]
>> Brian Holt: Let's
talk about merge sort.
We're gonna do this in two functions.
We're gonna do one and call it merge sort
and then we'll call the stitch or merge,
it's up to you.
I have merge in my notes, but
I'll actually probably call it stitch here
just to be a bit clear that merge sort and
merge are slightly different,
>> Brian Holt: Okay.
So merge sort.
We're actually going to break it down into
two sort of, or into two lists right?
So let's create our
function const merge sort.
Let's get rid of this too.
Merge sort equals Nuns okay.
The first thing we always
do with recursion,
recursive functions is base case.
So if nums.length is less than two.
Then, you're just gonna return nums,
right because if it's a list
of length one or zero.
In this particular case will never see
length zero but, if it's a length of one,
then it's already sorted.
So, we don't have to do anything about it,
nor can we split it into any further.
Right?
And then here we're going
to say const length,
people's nums.length const.middle equals
math.floor length divided by two and
you can use ceiling,
you can use round any one of
those fine I simply chose floor.
What floor does is basically says if you
have If you give it 2.5 it gives you two.
If you give it 2.8 it gives you 2.
It just always rounds down for you.
I like it cuz it's easy to communicate
that like this is always going to take
the smaller number.
Okay, and then I'm gonna create
two new arrays, left and right.
You can call them smaller and greater.
I choose left and right because that
makes sense to me, it's the left part of
the array, it's the right part of
the array, what works for you.
>> Brian Holt: So const left =
nums.slice 0, to the middle, and
then const right equals nums.slice.
Again slice is a JavaScript
array function and
this one is not destructive.
Meaning, it does not actually
modify the original array.
And it's gonna go from middle.
>> Brian Holt: To, you can put whatever
you want here is long as you get to
the end of the array.
I put length because length is always
going to get you to the end of the array.
I seem to recall that if you don't give it
anything it will also just take everything
but I'm quoting that
off the top of my head.
That might not be true.
But definitely if you give it length
that's always going to be greater than
to the end of the array so
that's a safe thing.
Okay.
So now, I have a left array and
a right array that are equally split.
I can guarantee that
everything on the left array
is everything that's not the right
array and vice versa, right.
Cuz the worst thing you
could do is like duplicate,
right cuz I need to be adding numbers
to the array and I'll be bad, okay.
And then here what I'm going to
do is I'm going to call stitch.
>> Brian Holt: mergeSort left and
mergeSort right.
Okay?
So that there's my recursive calls I
call mergeSort on the left part and
mergeSort on the right which is mergeSort
is again going to break it down
into smaller pieces, right.
And stitch is when it comes back up the
array as soon as mergeSort left returns.
And mergeSort right returns is going to
get fit into our stitching algorithm.
If this is clear for you,
you can also do const sorted left.
= mergeSort(left) and
const sortedRight = mergeSort(right).
And then you can just call stitch on
(sortedleft) and stitch on sortedright.
If that makes more sense to you
then my all means, do it like that.
I'll just leave it like that because
usually being verbose is helpful for
readability.
So.
>> Brian Holt: Okay.
So that's it for merge sort, right?
Now we're breaking all of our lists
down into smaller and smaller lists.
That we're then in turn going to stitch
back together as we come up, right.
So this is the first time that we.
Usually, we were doing
a recursion at the end, right.
And just ending, right.
Well, in this particular case,
we're going to do our recursive call,
actually, in the middle, right.
And this is where preserving state in
the middle becomes useful to us, right.
So we're gonna do a recursive
call on the left.
A recursive call on the right.
And then we're going to
merge them back together.
Okay?
And we haven't written stitch yet
but that's probably another thing that's
worth mentioning about recursion is,
it's kind of hard to wrap your mind around
because I'm calling merge sort which
I'm writing merge sort as I'm calling it
So you just have to make this assumption
that I'm gonna call mergeSort despite the
fact that I haven't written it yet, right?
And I'm just going to assume
that at some future time,
I'm going to make this crap work, right?
So it's kind of a backwards
way of thinking about.
We're used to writing something and
then using it, right?
Instead of using it then writing.
So, it's kind of a paragimre that
you have to wrap your mind around.
Okay, so any questions about that before
I move on to the stitching part of it?
There's nothing recursive about stitch,
which is nice.
All the recursion is
done here in mergeSort.
Great.
Well, let's do stitch.
>> Brian Holt: Again, if you go to the
answer part of this, it calls it merge.
I just chose to call it stitch today
because I was hoping that would make
that a little bit clearer for you.
I'm gonna call these left and right,
however, it doesn't actually matter.
You can call it right left,
you can call array one or
array two They have no meaning other
than that they're just different.
Right?
So whatever works for you.
>> Brian Holt: Okay?
So
I'm gonna create a new array
called results, right?
This is going to be the one that I
eventually return at the end, right?
And then here I'm do a while loop.
So while the left dot length and
right dot length.
So this is kind of a JavaScript trick.
If you're not familiar with JavaScript.
When left length of entry goes to
zero because we're going to be
destroying it as we go.
You'll eventually go to zero right and
zero when you coerce it right.
So if I say if zero that also is
equivalent to if false right So
if it again, if it's easier for you if,
length is less than or
equal to zero right?
That is essentially what I'm saying here,
right?
This is just a JavaScript
shortcut way of doing it.
So I'm saying as long as
there's something left.
In left and something left and right or
if there's array still in the left and
array items still in the right then
continue doing this loop right.
>> Brian Holt: Okay and if you remember
we're gonna just compare like is one
smaller is two smaller and
then we're going to advance one and
not the other right that's kind of the
algorithm part we're gonna be doing here.
So if left zero,
>> Brian Holt: Is less than or
equal to right zero,
>> Brian Holt: What
we're going to do is we're
going do results.push, right?
We're actually gonna talk
about stacks later today.
The push basically says, take my element
and tack it on to the end right.
That's the basic gist of push.
And then we're gonna do left.shift.
Now a lot of people aren't
super familiar with shift.
What shift is, is just like there's a push
and pop, there's shift and unshift.
So shift is going to pop it off the front.
Usually pop goes off the back right?
So shift is going to take the first
element or the zero element in left and
it's going to take that off and it's
going to push that into results right?
So that's what's happening here.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
else as you might have guessed it's
gonna be results.push right.shift.
So again shift is something
built into JavaScript arrays.
Just as an FYI you can also do like
results.unshift which is
a terrible name right.
So unshift is like push right so
you're pushing on to the front right.
That's what unshift does.
So push and unshift pop and shift.
I don't know why they went with that but
it's the way it is.
Okay so that's the first part right so
that's as long as they both
have something in them, right?
And then we're going to run into the case
and every single time That one of these
arrays is going to have something left
in it right and we have to put her and
put all those on the end.
So there's a couple ways to do this.
I've chose to just keep using
loops to hopefully be consistent.
So while left at length
results.push left.shift right.
So it just looked like this right?
You could also just do
an array concat right?
It would be totally fine to just
do results.concat left right.
That's still,
in fact you can even do it like this.
Pretty sure.
Anyway, I'm not gonna do that.
I just wanted to show you that
we're doing the same thing.
So I'm just doing the wild loops here.
results.push right.shift.
So whatever way works for you.
This looks weird for someone because we're
not gaining this by if statements but
remember you're only going to have one
of the arrays have something left.
So if left runs out first then
left.length is going to be zero.
And it's just going to skip
that array all together right?
It's not going to do anything there or
if right runs out first.
It'll do left and
then it'll just skip right.
So that's why we're doing if
lists left.length, right?
Because we don't need to.
It's unneeded.
It'll never hit both of those,
it only ever hit one of them.
>> Brian Holt: Okay.
And
then after that we just return results and
that's it.
>> Brian Holt: Lets go change this to un x
describe and it passes.
So, any questions about Mercer, or stitch,
or anything going on here.
Does it make sense?
Do we feel okay about
like how that's working?
It's kind of hard to conjure that
magic out of thin air in your head
like I get that like I'm giving you
like twenty minutes to work on these and
I had like two weeks of homework
to work on this, right?
So again this is the firehose
like prepare yourself.
But that's that's merge sort.
That's what JavaScript for
the most part is doing underneath
the hood when you call sort.
I think it's pretty powerful and
cool that you now know that.
Like you know how that works.
>> Speaker 2: Once you've
done all those comparison and
at the end the two wild loops,
that's just, everything else at the end is
pretty much already sorted, then you're
just dropping it on the end of it.
>> Brian Holt: Precisely.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Brian Holt: That's
exactly what's happening.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: So
to show you probably how I'd actually
do this since this is kind of silly.
You could do return
results.concat left comma right
cuz one of these is gonna be empty, right?
And so it's doesn't matter if you add or
you can do right left
that's totally fine too.
So you can just freely concatenate those
on to the end and it's totally fine,
or if you want to get even fancier
because who doesn't you can
do a dot dot dot results,
dot dot dot left, dot dot dot right.
And that actually works too.
Mind blown, I see lots of perplexed faces.
I use it later so let's talk about it.
This is an ES6 feature, first of all,
let's make sure I pass my test and
I'm not just making, okay.
Not making stuff up, I promise.
This is called the spread, the spread
operator.Yes this is the spread operator,
cuz I get spread and
rest operators cuz they look the same but
they're in different places.
This is the spread operator is saying I
have an array result I want you to spread
that out over this right?
So in this particular case it's an array
I'm saying take all of your elements and
spread it over this new array.
Then take all the elements
of left spread that right.
And actually if you can click
view compiled up here in the top.
And you can actually see what it's
doing and this might be gross alone.
Lets see if I can find it.
Yeah so, this is including a lot
of other stuff but down here.
Yeah see it's actually just trans-piling
into that which is kind of funny right?
But that's what the spread operator
does it's actually adding all these,
it's spreading these
elements over the array.
And we'll use that later because
I think it's kind of fun
functionality to be a six.
But again this is brand new, it doesn't
actually work in every browser today.
But it's coming etcetera etcetera,
whatever.
[LAUGH]